

The ultimate guide to plugins.	SITE OPTIMIZATION PLUGINS

Introduction.
There are many benefits of using WordPress to power your brand's online presence. 
From its flexibility as an open source content management system (CMS) to the dedicated community of WordPress developers that constantly contribute to its core software, notable agencies and brands across the globe choose WordPress to power incredible digital experiences. One area where WordPress really shines is through its countless integrations, including its vast ecosystem of modular code, known as plugins. 
WordPress is awesome because of its ability to easily extend and expand its functionality through plugins. 
WordPress plugins are bits of software that enable you to easily add new functionality to your websites. From maps and charts to SEO and eCommerce tools, plugins are added either automatically through the WordPress dashboard or manually by downloading the zip file directly (this usually requires some familiarity with File Transfer Protocol or FTP). 
With more than 50,000 free WordPress plugins to choose from, figuring out which plugins you need and which ones you can 
do without might seem like a daunting task. While the answer will vary depending on each use case, this guide will help you understand what types of WordPress plugins are out there and which ones you might consider installing on your site.
Plugins are extremely popular among  WP Engine customers.
For a real-world view into the widespread popularity of 
WordPress plugins, look no further than our customers at WP Engine, who have more than 7.1 million plugin installs across nearly half a million WordPress sites. 
Of our more than 120,000 global customers, 37% have between one and 10 plugins installed, another 37% have between 11 and 20, and 17% have between 21 and 30 plugins installed. That number begins to decrease as the number of active plugin installs gets higher. Nonetheless, 6% of our customers have between 31 and 40 plugins installed, 2% have between 41 and 50, and 1% have between 51 and 60 active plugins currently installed on their WordPress site(s). 
Of those plugins, the most popular with our customers are Gravity Forms, WP Bakery, and Slider Revolution, which together make up 80% of our top ten most-installed plugins. Other popular plugins among WP Engine customers include Yoast SEO Premium, WP Rocket, WP Forms, Divi Builder, Essential Grid, OptinMonster, and WooCommerce Subscriptions.







SEO plugins.
If you want to build a larger online audience, Search Engine Optimization (SEO) is imperative. While WordPress on its own is great for SEO, right out of the box, there are SEO plugins that can help your content rank higher. Here are a couple of WordPress' best plugins to help you implement a better SEO strategy. 

With more than 5 million active installations, Yoast SEO is one of the most popular WordPress plugins out there (it's also one of the most downloaded plugins among WP Engine customers). Yoast helps you improve SEO, increase reader engagement, and attract more visitors through social media with its settings. The plugin's main features include keyword optimization and content analysis-the plugin will literally tell you what you should change in your content, keyword-wise, to rank higher in search engine results. Other awesome aspects of Yoast SEO include a readability check, which ensures its technical configuration rolls out the red carpet for search engines, as well as easy canonical URL enablement, 24/7 support, and more.
All in One SEO Pack

All in One SEO is another tool that allows you to optimize your content for search engine results. While this plugin offers powerful SEO functionality out of the box, there are also advanced options (including an API) for developers. All in One SEO supports many integrations, including Google sitemaps, AMP, Google Analytics, and it's PHP 7+ compatible. One of the most useful features in All in One SEO is its "Pages" view, which allows you to make bulk changes to the SEO title, description, and keywords of your content.
WordLift - AI Powered SEO

WordLift brings the power of Artificial Intelligence to help publishers and content editors produce richer content, grow their organic traffic, and engage with their audience. This plugin helps you organize posts and pages by adding facts, links, and media to build beautifully structured websites, for both humans and search engines.
Sitemap plugins.
A sitemap is a list of website pages that puts your content into an organized model, making it easier for web crawlers to navigate your site. When your WordPress site has an effective sitemap, it makes it easier for search engines to understand what types of content you're offering and it can improve search engine rankings. Aside from the already mentioned SEO plugins (which include sitemap functionality), here are a few other sitemap plugins you might consider.
Google XML Sitemaps

Google XML Sitemaps is among the most popular sitemap plugins with more than 2 million active installs. You can use this plugin to generate a special XML sitemap that helps the most popular search engines (Google, Bing, Yahoo, and Ask.com) index your site. XML Sitemaps is easy to use and it won't detract from site performance.

Jetpack by Wordpress offers a multitude of security, performance, and site management features, including sitemap capabilities. Upon installing, Jetpack automatically creates a sitemap for your site, as well as one tailored specifically for Google News. If you decide to use a different sitemap plugin, you can still install Jetpack for its other features and turn the sitemap capabilities off.
Lead generation plugins.
A business simply cannot survive without adequate lead generation; without lead generation, you can't reach out to new customers and discover opportunities. To grow your business, it's essential to have an effective and reliable lead generation plugin on your WordPress site(s). These plugins will help you collect and manage emails, find new clients, and expand your business.
HubSpot All-In-One Marketing

Hubspot All-in-One Marketing is a free WordPress plugin that will help you grow your email list, manage your contacts, and send marketing emails all through HubSpot's free CRM. This plugin includes lead capture tools like forms, popups, live chat, and an integrated free contact database (CRM). Hubspot All-in-One Marketing also allows you to build and send email campaigns and manage your digital ads through HubSpot. All these features work immediately with no developer help needed.
Popups by OptinMonster

OptinMonster helps you grow your email list and get more subscribers with popup and other types of high converting optin forms. OptinMonster is available for free, but does require a paid subscription to use. The plugin comes with an easy-to-use form builder, exit-intent technology, page-level targeting, and behavior automation, all of which have resulted in massive conversion rates for users. 
SumoMe

SumoMe generates leads by helping your readers tweet and share your content. The plugin also adds a pop-up opt-in signup form on your website. Tools like the SumoMe welcome mat, smart bar, scroll box, and more will help you grow your traffic while collecting valuable leads.
MailOptin

MailOptin is another great plugin that helps with lead generation, customer acquisition, and email marketing and automation. The plugin allows you to exponentially grow your mailing list and display targeted messages across your WordPress website(s) with popups, before and after post-optin forms, and sidebar/widget subscriber forms. MailOptin also lets you send automated/event-triggered newsletters such as automatic new post notifications.
Instagram plugins.
While Instagram is a popular social media platform for sharing visual experiences and memories, it's also a great outlet for showcasing your brand through visual storytelling. If your brand has an Instagram account, why not share it on your website? There are a number of awesome Instagramcompatible plugins that can help you add your photo feed to a specific page or post on your site. Here are some of our top picks. Just remember...if your profile is set to "private," be sure to change it to "public" or these plugins won't work!
Smash Balloon Social Photo Feed

If you're looking for a mobile-friendly and responsive template for sharing your photo feed, then the Smash Balloon Social Photo Feed plugin might be for you. This plugin allows you to display one or multiple Instagram accounts, giving you the option to choose from thumbnails, medium, and large photo sizes. The plugin also contains a "follow on Instagram" button, the ability to randomize the order of your images, shortcode options, and complete customization with CSS and JavaScript. 
10Web Social Photo Feed

10Web Social Photo Feed provides you with an enormous range of options when it comes to displaying an Instagram feed on your site. Fully responsive, this plugin provides userfriendly management and easy setup. You can easily embed a gallery into any post or page using a shortcode, or by activating the plugin's sidebar widget. The plugin also gives you the ability to choose from a range of different layouts, as well as the ability to filter out any specific photos you don't want to be displayed. You can even redirect your images to open via Lightbox.
AccessPress iFeeds

If looking to display your feed in a mosaic view, look no further than AccessPress' iFeeds plugin. This plugin gives you the option to choose from three beautifully designed layouts that you can display on your site. Simply use a widget or shortcode to insert your Instagram feed into any post or page on your site. For a larger range of customization options, AccessPress also offers a pro version of its iFeeds plugin.
Contest plugins.
What better way to attract more visitors to your site than by offering them a powerful and enticing contest or giveaway? There are two things that are pretty much universally liked in this world: winning and free stuff. The giveaway item doesn't have to be substantial either. After all, free is free. Not only will visitors feel the urge to participate, most contests involve social sharing which will generate even more traffic to your site. These contest plugins will make it easy to set the rules, establish a time limit, promote the event, and choose a winner.
Contests by Rewards Fuel

Contests by Rewards Fuel is a great plugin that can help your contests go viral. Administrators have the ability to set up specific guidelines that require users to complete tasks on social media to win, such as sharing on Facebook or creating an Instagram hashtag. Currently, there are 16 entry methods for contests including newsletter entry, an Instagram follow, and more.
InviteBox

Design and launch social referral contests and programs using InviteBox. With this easy-to-use, straightforward plugin, you can set up an instant reward referral, referral contest, goalbased rewards, or a sweepstakes campaign in minutes.



Monetization plugins. 
Monetizing a website is mission-critical for many WordPress users, but it can be a serious challenge. One good way to start monetizing your WordPress site is by using display ads. Through ad management plugins, a banner is typically provided by affiliate networks or display advertising platforms (like Google Adsense). With one of these plugins in place, you can easily place an ad on your site to start monetizing.
AdRotate

Instead of uploading your ad to a widget, AdRotate lets you schedule and upload ads through an interface. Scheduling ads can be great if you know certain ads perform better at certain times. You can also specify how ads rotate, and either show one ad at a time or have the ads rotate at a predefined time, such as every few seconds. 
PayPal Buy Now Button

The PayPal Buy Now Button is a great plugin for securing purchases, and increasing your chances of monetizing your site(s). With this plugin installed, customers who don't have their credit card on hand can make a direct purchase through their PayPal account. The plugin is super easy to set up, and in minutes anyone from around the world can start buying products or services from your site.

Affiliate plugins.
Whether you already run an existing popular WordPress site or your site is still building a loyal audience, affiliate plugins are a great way to help you monetize your site. Adding affiliate links to your pages and posts is a great way to cash in on your efforts. These affiliate plugins will help drive sales on your site. 
WP Affiliate Manager

If you're looking to drive more sales to your store or site, WP Affiliate Manager might be for you. WP Affiliate Manager helps you track your referrals and affiliates sent to your site so you can give the correct commissions. The plugin also reports on real-time traffic and sales so you can track earning and payouts. Even better-there's no limit as to how many affiliates you can sign up. 
Easy Affiliate Links

Another solution for managing all of your affiliate links is Easy Affiliate Links. With this plugin, you can create short links to cloak your affiliate links so they blend in with your content. Links can easily be created using the visual and HTML editor. Add-ons are also possible and include things like analytics and geo-specific links for regional and local sales support.
AffiliateWP

If you've already launched your website and you're still waiting for the sales to roll in, it's time to start telling people about your business. Affiliate marketing is one of the simplest and most effective marketing strategies, even if you've never done any marketing, ever. AffiliateWP is a premium (paid), full-featured affiliate marketing plugin for WordPress that makes affiliate marketing easy. Set up your affiliate program within minutes, and start recruiting affiliates to promote your WPEnginehosted website.
Crowdfunding plugins. 
By adding crowdfunding links to your site, you can assemble your users behind a cause. The purpose of crowdfunding is to raise funds for a cause you believe in, which is easy to build on WordPress. Here are a few plugins that can implement this feature.
IgnitionDeck

IgnitionDeck offers a unique crowdfunding framework that enables donation functionality. With this plugin installed, you can utilize real-time stats with both beautifully designed frontend and back-end displays. IgnitionDeck works exquisitely with thousands of WordPress themes, and upgrade options allow you to integrate with multiple gateways, build your own white label crowdfunding platform, and much more.
Charitable

The Charitable plugin provides a WordPress fundraising toolkit that gives you complete control over your WordPress fundraising efforts. Through the plugin, you can help users support a common cause. Utilize PayPal and offline payments, or you might consider a premium payment add-on, like Stripe or PayFast, to tailor your crowdfunding needs to existing or new content.
Ecommerce plugins. 
WordPress started out as a blogging platform, however, since its inception, it has evolved into a fully functional platform for creating an eCommerce site. Thanks to plugins and third-party developers, you can easily add eCommerce functionality to your site without even knowing how to code. Here are a few of the top WordPress plugins you can use to equip your site with eCommerce functionality so you can start selling today. 
WOOCommerce

WooCommerce is the leading ecommerce plugin with more than 5 million active installations and counting, featuring a complete suite of tools to help you build and run your online vendor business. Out of the box, WooCommerce offers hundreds of integrations including PayPal standard gateway, check and bank transfer, Google Analytics, basic shipping options, the ability to add premium extensions for options such as FedEx, UPS, USPS, inventory management, reporting, compatibility with any WordPress theme, and much more.
Easy Digital Downloads

Easy Digital Downloads is an eCommerce plugin that makes it easy to sell non-tangible goods on your site. Whether your download type is software, documents, photos, ebooks, songs, graphics, or any other type of media file, the Easy Digital Downloads plugin makes your content available for purchase worldwide. Even better, the plugin supports 15-plus types of payments and is multilingual.

The BigCommerce for WordPress plugin combines the flexibility of WordPress with a robust commerce engine to allow mid-market and enterprise merchants to scale like never before. Scale your site with WordPress on the front-end and free up backend resources from things like catalog management, payment processing, order fulfillment and more. The BigCommerce plugin does the heavy commerce lifting, letting you scale your eCommerce without losing speed or uptime.
Shopify

Although Shopify is a standalone platform, it's also been developed into a WordPress integration so you can sell items on your blog or WordPress site. The extension works to create a standalone mini-storefront on your WordPress blog or website, connecting directly to Shopify's secure shopping platform. It's super easy to set up and gives you a ton of customization possibilities so your end-user won't even know they're on two separate platforms.



Child theme plugins. 
A child theme is a layer of code that inherits the functionality and design of its parent theme. Many WordPress users rely on child themes to experiment with different elements and features on their site(s) while keeping the option to fall back on their default code available if they don't like what they see. While you can create your own child theme from scratch, these plugins can also be helpful.
Child Theme Configurator

Child Theme Configurator will quickly help you set up a child theme. You can identify the CSS attributes you want to change without having to look for them. The plugin will then automatically create your child theme with a single click. Every stylesheet will be indexed so you can go back at any time to look at the log of what you've done. Try making a variety of child themes and go through and use the best one. In addition to creating a child theme, the plugin will also help you identify potential problems with your theme and help you address them. With Child Theme Configurator, you will have the ability to truly customize every part of your website.
Child Theme Wizard

Using Child Theme Wizard, you can easily create a child theme without any additional tools. From the WordPress admin, all you have to do is specify the theme you want to clone and then the new theme will appear under Appearance " Themes. It's that easy!

Slider plugins. 
In the world of web design, a slider typically refers to an image slideshow added onto a web page. If you're interested in adding a slider to your site, WordPress makes it super easy. You can completely customize the slider to fit your needs and put it together quickly. Here are a couple of our picks that can help you create a beautiful slider on your site.
Slider by 10Web

Slider by 10Web is a great option for adding fast-loading, responsive, and SEO-friendly sliders to your website pages, posts, theme header, or any other location. The plugin supports both images and videos on the slides, which can be customized with various transition effects.
Slider Revolution

Slider Revolution is another great option for adding dynamic sliders to your website(s). While it is a premium (paid) WordPress plugin, Slider Revolution lets you create outstanding, professional content modules with no coding required. It's also one of the top ten most-used paid plugins among WP Engine customers.

Form plugins.
Adding professional, highly functional contact and lead forms to your WordPress site(s) is an important aspect of overall site design and ultimately, lead capture and conversions. While building these forms from scratch can be a challenging task, there are hundreds of form plugins available that make it easy to add this functionality. Here are some of our picks to help you sort through the crowd.
WPForms

WPForms is a powerful, easy-to-use form building plugin that lets you create beautiful contact forms, feedback forms, subscription forms, payment forms, and other types of forms for your WordPress site in minutes, without writing any code and while still providing the extensibility and customization that developers love.
Contact Form 7

Contact Form 7 is a great plugin that lets users create beautiful contact forms. With more than 5 million active installations, it's one of the most popular WordPress form plugins and will allow you to manage multiple contact forms and customize them to fit your needs. Contact Form 7 supports AJAX-powered submitting, CAPTCHA, and Akismet filtering. 
Ninja Forms 

Ninja Forms is easy-to-use for senior developers and beginners alike. A user-friendly drag and drop platform makes building forms self-explanatory, but built-in hooks, filters, and customizable fields can also be utilized. With Ninja Forms, you can also modify and mark existing fields as favorites for later. Users will be redirected to success messages or elsewhere upon completion of a form.
Lightbox plugins.
In terms of plugin-extended media management, lightboxes are one of the oldest and most popular functionalities out there. Whether you're a freelancer trying to make your brand website more visually appealing, or a restaurant owner aiming to entice new customers with scrumptious pictures of your dishes, here are some various lightbox plugins that can help you out.
Responsive Lightbox by dFactory

Responsive Lightbox by dFactory is a popular lightbox plugin for WordPress that lets users create galleries and view larger versions of images, galleries, and videos in a lightbox (overlay), optimized for mobile devices. The plugin's various lightbox scripts include SwipeBox, prettyPhoto, FancyBox, Nivo Lightbox, and Image Lightbox, among others. Users can even apply this feature to YouTube and Vimeo links as well.
ARI Fancy Lightbox

ARI Fancy Lightbox gives users a stylish way to display images and videos with the ability to alter things such as overlay style, button size, button text, etc. This plugin can display various types of content in its lightbox including photos, Google Maps, PDF files, and more. Similar to Responsive Lightbox above, this plugin is mobile-friendly and can be easily integrated with social media sites such as Facebook.
Typography plugins.
One of the many great things about WordPress is that it's completely customizable. When it comes to design, you aren't just stuck with your theme's given fonts. There are a number of plugins out there that can expand your options-just remember to pick a good font that's easy to read. Here are a few awesome typography plugins that make it easy to punch up your site with an exciting font.
Easy Google Fonts

Easy Google Fonts allows you to choose from Google's collection of more than 600 fonts - it simply enables the font you choose within your WordPress theme. No coding required. Another benefit of this plugin is it doesn't matter which theme you're using-this plugin is 100 percent compatible with any theme. Easy Google Fonts integrates with your customizer so you can see a real-time preview of each option as you change colors and fonts. It also backs-up its list automatically as new fonts are added to Google's collection.
wp-Typography

WP-Typography is another solid option for improving web typography with attractive fonts. With more than 50 languages supported, the plugin contains intelligent character replacement that provides smart handling of elements including quotation marks, dashes, math symbols, and more. You can also use CSS hooks for styling character aspects such as ampersands, numbers, uppercase words, initial quotes, and guillemets.
Shortcode plugins.
To extend WordPress' functionality you might consider adding a WordPress shortcode plugin to your site. Shortcodes allow you to execute code on posts, pages, etc. without having to directly write code. Instead, you can use these nifty little pieces of code to execute a larger command out of sight. Here are some shortcode plugins you might consider using.
Shortcodes Ultimate

Shortcodes Ultimate gives you access to a mega pack of shortcodes. From easily creating tabs, buttons, boxes, sliders and carousels, responsive videos and more, you can take your WordPress site to the next level without having to exert the extra energy needed to code these features up. If you're looking for an extra punch, there are premium (paid) add-ons that include extra shortcodes, additional skins, a shortcode creator, and an add-ons bundle.   
AMR Shortcode Any Widget

If you're looking for a way to add widgets to your site, shortcodes could help. The AMR Shortcode Any Widget plugin was designed specifically to allow you to insert widgets into a page using a shortcode. All you have to do is install the plugin and then go to Appearance " Widgets and drag and drop the widgets you want to display in your post or page into the shortcodes sidebar. Then, simply go to the post you want to display the widget on and enter that shortcode into your content. Easy peasy! 



Video plugins. 
Images are a great way to supplement your content, but videos can be even more dynamic. An engaging video can pull in more viewers and keep them on your site longer. That said, the native media hub in WordPress may not format your videos the way you want. That's where plugins come in. We've compiled a few of the most popular video plugins out there. With these, you will be able to display your own videos or pull them in from somewhere else.
Cloudflare Stream Video

The Cloudflare Stream plugin for WordPress gives site owners full control over their video strategy, allowing users to easily integrate video into their WordPress sites. The plugin is blocknative, meaning it works well with the new WordPress post editor, and offers additional features such as multiple playback options, per-minute pricing, adaptive bitrate streaming, and video storage, among many others. 
YouTube Embed Plugin

One of the easiest ways to upload and view videos online is through YouTube. Once you upload your content, use the YouTube Embed Plugin to put it into your site. The plugin allows you to add an entire YouTube playlist right onto your site, or opt for a video gallery. You can choose to enable automatic play or let users scroll through the playlist. The plugin also creates custom thumbnails so you don't have to. 
Upon downloading the plugin, you'll get a special button for YouTube right next to "Add Media" on your admin controls, making it incredibly easy to pull in any videos you want. If the channel is your own, add a Subscribe button below the video gallery and boost your numbers.
The ultimate guide to plugins.
WP Video Lightbox

WP Video Lightbox allows you to display videos in a different way. When a user starts to play a video, it will pop out and make the screen behind the player dark. This makes it easier to view the video without the distractions of the post or ads behind it. The plugin works with YouTube or Vimeo and it's very easy to embed. 
If you don't have a lot of video content, the plugin can also be used to create a lightbox for photographs and other images. It's also a great plugin for infographics and diagrams.
Audio player plugins. 
Embedding audio files on your WordPress site can be challenging if you don't have the right plugin or knowledge of code. For one reason or another, you might run into a situation where an audio file is required on your site. Here are a few plugins you can use to enable audio player functionality on your WordPress site.

Compact WP Audio Player

Compact WP Audio Player uses an HTML5 + Flash hybrid to embed mp3 audio files on your site. Fully responsive and compatible with all web browsers, you can easily add a compact audio player to any page or post on your site with a shortcode. The plugin is compact as stated in its name, with only one customization feature (located in Settings >> SC Audio Player) that determines whether or not front-end users are able to play multiple audio files at once.
Html5 Audio Player

Html5 Audio Player is an audio plugin that offers a bit more functionality. Using this plugin, you can play .mp3, .wav, or .ogg audio files on your WordPress site(s). There's also the option to add a rating, artist, and title information, as well as a cover image.
27
Graph and chart plugins.
Turning extensive amounts of data into a chart will make it more digestible at first glance. While charts can be used for presentations and PowerPoints, how many times do you see one in a blog post? Not nearly enough. A common misconception is charts are difficult to create on a website. This simply isn't true-there are numerous plugins that can do the job quite nicely. You might even end up finding it easier than building a chart in Excel. 
Visualizer: Tables and Charts Manager  for WordPress

The Visualizer: Tables and Charts Manager for WordPress plugin is a simple, easy to use, and powerful plugin that lets you create, manage, and embed interactive charts and tables within your WordPress posts and pages. The plugin uses Google Visualization API, DataTables.net, and ChartJS to add responsive and animated charts and diagrams, which support cross-browser compatibility (adopting VML for older IE versions) and crossplatform portability to new iOS and Android releases.



Knowledge base plugins.
To reduce support inquiries, you might consider creating or adding a knowledge base to your site. A knowledge base (sometimes referred to as a "support portal" or "support garage") will help users find quick answers and resources for their questions. Here are just a few WordPress knowledge base solutions you might consider putting to use. 
WP Knowledgebase

WP Knowledgebase helps you create an attractive and professional knowledge base your customers can use to find answers to their support-related questions or FAQs. This fully responsive plugin allows visitors to navigate their way to articles featuring answers using predictive text search engines to simplify the search process. For developers, it's super easy to adjust the look of the knowledge base to match your website.
Heroic Knowledge Base

Heroic Knowledge Base by HeroThemes is a premium (paid) plugin that helps reduce support costs and support tickets by making it easy to add an aesthetically pleasing knowledge base to your website. Some of the plugin's features include the ability to add article attachments, content reordering, instant answers, and built-in analytics.
Translation plugins.
WordPress now powers more than 35% of the Internet. As that trend continues to grow, it's important to make sure your site is globally accessible to users who might not speak your native language. To bring in a wider audience, you might consider installing a translation plugin. Here are a few of the most popular translation plugins you can use to help broaden your global reach. 
Google Website Translator

Google Website Translator, by Prisna, harnesses the power of Google's automatic translation service to translate your website into more than 100 languages. This simple and complete multilingual solution for WordPress is easy to install and start putting to use. 
Loco Translate

Loco Translate is another great plugin for built-in website translation. This plugin's features include extraction of translatable strings from your source code, built-in WordPress locale codes, support for PO features like comments, and a protection of the language directory for saving custom translations. 
Translate WordPress with GTranslate

Another great translation plugin, Translate WordPress with GTranslate, uses Google's translation services and comes with more than 100 languages you can translate your site to, meaning your site will be accessible to more than 99 percent of Internet users. If you opt for the pro version, your site will be fully SEO compatible, meaning your site will have even further international reach.
Amazon Polly

While the Amazon Polly plugin for WordPress is not a traditional translation plugin (it's initial use case was for text-to-speech functions) it too has wide-ranging translation capabilities. With the plugin installed, users can automatically translate text-based content and have it read in Spanish, German, French, Portuguese, and more. 
The machine translation feature is powered by Amazon Translate, which is a neural machine translation service that uses deep learning models to deliver more accurate and natural sounding translation than traditional statistical and rule-based translation algorithms.
Live chat plugins.
Healthy business growth not only depends on acquiring new customers, but also maintaining your current customers' satisfaction. While customer support comes in all shapes and sizes, live chat is one area that allows you to resolve customer concerns in a timely manner. 
Using plugins to enable chat functionality within your WordPress website(s) is a great way to adopt this functionality. Here are a few of our top picks.
WP-Live Chat by 3CX 

WP-Live Chat by 3CX is aimed at small businesses looking for a cost-effective chat solution. It's one of the most popular WordPress chat plugins for a reason. The plugin comes with a long list of awesome features, including six predefined live chat box themes, the ability to drag and drop chats anywhere on your page, Google Analytics integration, translation capabilities, and much much more.
Tawk.to Live Chat

Tawk.to Live Chat is another great chat plugin that gives users the ability to monitor and chat with site visitors-something that's not only great for live chat, but for generating new sales and leads as well. The plugin is compatible with all web browsers and has even developed free apps for iOS, Android, Windows, and Mac OSX.
Tidio Live Chat

Tidio Live Chat was designed specifically for WordPress users The plugin allows you to chat with and contact any visitor on your site - it even supports 140 different languages to help you with global reach. With Tidio Live Chat, you can customize with three templated designs and a completely customizable color scheme. It evens allows for integration with Zendesk, GetResponse, SalesForce, MailChimp, and much more.
Ratings plugins. 
Whether you're selling a product or service online, reviews can immensely impact a potential customer's decision. In fact, when browsing online, 70 percent of buyers look for product reviews prior to making a purchase and 72 percent of consumers will take action after reading a positive review. 
Adding a review feature to your website is not only a great way to incentivize a purchase, it also allows for user-generated content to appear on your site. If you're looking to add this functionality to your WordPress site, read below for some notable review plugins that will encourage user feedback on your content, products, and business.
Rating-Widget

Rating-Widget's star review system allows users to receive ratings and comment reviews on all sorts of content, including WooCommerce products, author reviews, BuddyPress, bbPress, and more. In addition to offering a free option, RatingWidget also has advanced plans ranging from $3.99-$29.99 annually, as well as agency and enterprise-specific plans.
YASR-Yet Another Star Rating

YASR-Yet Another Stars Rating is another solid option for adding ratings/ reviews to your site(s). The plugin allows for both visitor reviews and voting reviews, and you can create multiple sets of stars for multiple criteria on a page or post. Installing the plugin is a little more technically advanced than some of the other options out there, but YASR provides welldetailed instructions in the WordPress Plugin Repository. The plugin also supports shortcodes, rankings, and rich snippets. 
Tooltip plugins.
A "tooltip" is a small popup that appears when a user hovers their cursor over or clicks on a particular icon or a highlighted word or phrase on your site. Tooltips are mainly used to display explanatory text that not every reader will need to go through (hence the name "tooltip")-for example, to define jargon or a little tip of basic information relevant to the text or webpage at hand. Tooltip plugins can help you easily gain this functionality on your site. 
CM Tooltip Glossary

CM Tooltip Glossary is an excellent tooltip plugin with great functionality. This plugin is able to create a glossary of tooltips rather than just inserting random ones without having any real way of keeping track of them. CM Tooltip's design is an underline to highlight a tipped word or phrase and a nondescript pop-up with a solid color background. The rather simple design allows for ultimate readability.
WordPress Tooltips

WordPress Tooltips is a powerful plugin that offers a great deal of customization and options for your tooltips. The plugin has a glossary functionality and also allows you to add multiple types of content to each tooltip: text, images, links, videos, radio, and MP4 are all possible. You can also choose from seven preset color schemes and nine trigger methods.



Security plugins. 
While WP Engine does a lot to harden the security of its customers' WordPress sites, it's never a bad idea to install additional security precautions. Besides, security is about risk reduction, not risk elimination. According to WordPress.org, "It's about employing all the appropriate controls available to you, within reason, that allow you to improve your overall posture reducing the odds of making yourself a target, subsequently getting hacked." 
While WP Engine does disallow some security plugins, here are a few you might consider using to further harden the security of your website.
Wordfence

Wordfence is among the most popular WordPress security plugins, with more than 3 million active installations and thousands of 5-star ratings in the WordPress Plugin Repository. Initially included on WP Engine's list of disallowed plugins due to its incompatibility with our platform's internal security offering, the Wordfence and WP Engine developer teams teamed up and worked together to make the services compatible with one another. 
Wordfence is a great plugin for WordPress users who want the added security protection of an endpoint firewall and malware scanner, both of which were built from the ground up to protect WordPress specifically. Additionally, Wordfence's Threat Defense Feed arms the plugin with the latest firewall rules, malware signatures, and malicious IP addresses it needs to keep your website safe. 
iThemes Security

iThemes Security provides more than 30 ways to help you secure your WordPress site, including 2FA, a malware scanning schedule, password security, Google reCAPTCHA, and more. The plugin also lets you ban accounts that have already tried to break into other sites through brute force attacks. You'll gain peace of mind knowing the plugin has worked to secure your server and that it does things like instantly reports where vulnerabilities exist and fixes them in seconds.
The ultimate guide to plugins.
BulletProof Security

BulletProof Security is a solid security plugin that provides strong protection against a range of common injections, including XSS, RFI, CRLF, CSRF, Base64, Code Injection, and SQL Injections. This wide-ranging security solution also includes firewalls, login security monitoring, idle session logout, DB backup logging, HTTP error logging, and more.
Sucuri Security

Sucuri Security helps harden your WordPress site through monitoring all security related events within your WordPress site. By logging all activity to a cloud-based server, this ensures the attacker cannot mess with your security logs or wipe your forensic data. The plugin also provides Security File Integrity 

Monitoring to better detect when (and if) you have a problem. In addition, Sucuri provides you with remote malware scanning, blacklist monitoring, post-hack security actions, and more.
User role plugins. 
By default, WordPress comes with five predefined user roles: 
• Administrator 
• Editor 
• Author 
• Contributor 
• Subscriber
Each of these roles comes with a set of specific permissions regarding what a user can and cannot do. However, out of the box, these user roles cannot be customized to limit or add new permissions. 
If you want to expand the capabilities that a particular role is allowed (or even add new roles), you'll need to install a plugin. Here are a few of our top picks that can help you further establish user roles on your site.
38
User Role Editor

The User Role Editor plugin lets you adjust user roles and capabilities with ease. With full support for WordPress Multisite networks, this plugin lets you pinpoint specific tasks per user and even hide front-end menu items from other users. While the plugin is free to activate in the WordPress Repository, you can upgrade to a premium version for an abundance of additional modules to work with.
User Role Editor by Members

With User Role Editors by Members, you'll be able to smoothly control permissions beyond what WordPress alone allows you to do. Key features of this plugin include a role manager, the ability to hand out multiple user roles and explicitly deny capabilities, cloning capacity, content permissions, shortcodes, widgets, plugin integration, and more.
WPFront User Role Editor

The WPFront User Role Editor plugin is another great option for managing user roles in WordPress. Through this plugin, you can add, edit, and delete user roles. The free version also allows you to migrate users to other sites. Through paid premium options, a ton of features are added, including custom post type permissions, content restriction shortcodes, an admin menu editor, and more.



Booking + calendar plugins.
Getting your name on the map as a musician, an artist, or any other type of event-centric entrepreneur can be difficult if people don't come to those events. Putting a calendar directly on your site is a great way to keep your audience informed and get people involved. The following calendar and booking plugins make it a lot easier for visitors to schedule appointments and see availability right on your WordPress website. Here are a few noteworthy plugins you should know about.
Event Tickets

Provide easy ways for customers to RSVP to events with the Event Tickets plugin. Pair with Events Calendar and you can match existing events with RSVP functionality. With its plug-nplay system, Event Tickets is built for developers; site builders can access tools including partial template overrides, a host of template tags, hooks and filters, careful documentation, as well as a library of free extensions.
Ticket Tailor

Ticket Tailor uses an intuitive, versatile e-ticketing system that provides the ability to quickly and easily sell tickets. E-tickets will be automatically sent with QR codes and a barcode to attendees. Ticket Tailor is highly customizable with the ability to customize e-tickets to say whatever you want. 
In addition to an easy to use and highly customizable platform, Ticket Tailor features essential integrations that make ticket visibility and usability easier. Ticket Tailor uses PayPal for simple credit card payments, MailChimp to email attendees, and Facebook for direct event registration.
Tickera

With Tickera, you can avoid profit-sharing with a third party, which means no middlemen or unnecessary costs. Tickera's platform lets you manage various events, ticket distribution, and discount codes with ease. The plugin's users can access various ticket options including VIP tickets, check-in, ticket sale dates, or simpler options like quantity and price. Users can also choose to capitalize on all available options or opt to keep their ticketing simple and option free. 
Events Manager

Events Manager not only displays your events but also lets users register for upcoming ones. You will receive booking results and know exactly how many people are expected to show up. Whether your event is free or paid, you'll be able to easily keep track of attendance. You can even customize whether or not users are able to buy bulk tickets, or get discounts for certain items. You can also choose how the events are displayed. For instance, you can add an image, description, time, and map. This is a great option for users who need to keep track of attendance.
Directory plugins.
It's easy to convert your WordPress site into a robust directory business. Using one of the plugins below, you can either turn your entire site into a directory website or only add the feature to certain pages.
Business Directory Plugin

The Business Directory Plugin works to add a Yelp-style review or Yellow-Pages style directory to link your users to. With full customization possibilities, you can meld this plugin with the theme of your site to stay on brand. The plugin comes with fully modifiable form fields, as well as the ability to upload photos and accept payment for listings. With Business Directory up and running, you'll be able to turn your website into a thriving online directory in no time.
Geo Directory

Geo Directory is a plugin that lets you add millions of listings to your blog or site through both free and premium addons. In a short amount of time, you'll be able to create a fully customizable listing that provides a compelling user experience. No need to sacrifice design or aesthetic; this tool can be fully adjusted to match your current site.
Invoice plugins. 
Invoice plugins make manually sending an invoice a thing of the past. Key features of these plugins make payments easier and more flexible, and include settings to make your invoice notifications more customizable.
Sprout Invoices

Improve your invoice workflow with the Sprout Invoices plugin. This plugin provides a number of fully customizable templates to fit with your theme and accepts a variety of payment methods. While the free version comes with PayPal payments, the pro (paid) version offers additional upgrades along with payment add-ons.
WooCommerce PDF Invoices & Packing Slips

Automatically add a PDF invoice to your eCommerce order confirmation emails with WooCommerce PDF Invoices. With this plugin, you can issue invoices using multiple different languages, fully customize the HTML/CSS of a template, and store all generated invoices within your account page.
Sliced Invoices

Sliced Invoices is another solid option when it comes to invoicing plugins, and makes invoicing a breeze. Key features of this plugin include offline payment methods, PayPal Express Checkout, invoicing in any currency, exporting invoices to CSV, and more.
Project management plugins.
A key aspect of any well-run WordPress site is organization. Project management plugins help facilitate planning, order, and discipline within your business. A good project management plugin can help ensure that tasks are properly delegated and deadlines are easy to keep track of; the following plugins can help you save an enormous amount of time.
SP Project & Document Manager

SP Project & Document Manager is a powerful plugin that lets you manage documents and files across many media types, allowing you to manage clients, documents, accounts, vendors, distribution, and more. Users at all levels are able to create and manage projects. Administrators control all aspects of user access: interactions with clients, management of sales organization, and more are all easily maintained within this plugin. With an easy-to-use template, clients have complete control over the flow of information and can add/modify projects as needed. 
WP Project Manager

WP Project Manager is a plugin designed specifically for project management within WordPress. Features of this plugin include everything you need to run an efficient site: the ability to create and modify projects, assign team members to projects, send messages about projects with attachments, and add comments about projects. Additional features include the ability to make custom to-do lists as well as create milestones for better project management.
Panorama

Panorama is a WordPress project management plugin that gives clients and team members a visual representation of project progress. The plugin lets users communicate project status and phases as well as document status, important events and timing. Panorama's timing features also allow you to determine if you're on track or behind schedule.



Site optimization plugins. 
Fast website speed plays a vital role in boosting traffic and revenue. Yet, just fractions of a second can make the difference between a positive and negative online experience. In fact, studies show that today, more than a quarter of your audience will be gone after waiting just four seconds for a page to fully load. If you're looking to speed up page load times, check out the plugins below, which can dramatically help with site optimization.
Autoptimize

Minification, the process of removing unnecessary characters from source code (like whitespace and newline characters), is one way to improve page load times. Autoptimize helps with WordPress site optimization by minifying certain assets of your site, like CSS, HTML, and JavaScript files. 
Simply install the plugin and then check the boxes for code you want to be minified. You can even add scripts for the code you don't want to be compressed, as well as control whether or not you want the compressed files in the HTML code header or footer. By using a minification plugin like Autoptimize, your site will load quicker and code will be much easier to read.
WP-Optimize

Over time, your site will begin to accumulate unnecessary data. WP-Optimize is a WordPress site optimization plugin built to help clean up your WordPress database for maximized efficiency. This plugin works to defragment MySQL tables as well as remove data such as pingbacks, trashed comments, expired transient options, post revisions, and so on. The plugin also offers great control over which areas of your site you want to optimize, and gives you the option to run automatic, scheduled cleanups of your site's database.
Optimize Database after Cleaning Revisions

If you'd rather clean up your database in a single click, then the Optimize Database after Cleaning Revisions plugin might be for you. With just a single click, the plugin works to delete a number of unnecessary data, like trashed posts, spammed comments, unused tags, expired transients, and more. Additionally, this plugin keeps a log of everything it does, is available in multiple languages, and also works with WordPress Multisite.
WP-Smush Image Optimization

It's important not to forget about optimizing images for fast load times. Using a plugin like Smush Image Compression and Optimization can make a huge impact on page load times. 
The plugin works to resize, optimize, and compress all of your images for the web so they load faster than before. If your site is photo-rich, this plugin is a must-have.
WP Rocket

Typically WP Engine disallows caching plugins on our Digital Experience Platform (because we already do it for you). However, we've worked with WP Rocket to optimize their caching plugin so it will work on our platform. WP Rocket is a WordPress plugin that helps with site optimization through things like minification of CSS and JS, lazy loading images, deferring remote JavaScript requests, and more. It's a great plugin to invest in if you're looking to improve site speed and page load times across multiple websites.
PHP Compatibility Checker

If you're looking to optimize your site for improved page speed, you might consider switching to the latest version of PHP. PHP is one of the most popular web development languages in the world. To reap the benefits of it, you can use the PHP Compatibility Checker to detect which theme(s) and plugins are compatible and which have conflicting code. It's important to do this because PHP is not backwards compatible, meaning once you switch over, you won't be able to go back to previously-used, legacy systems.
Plugins to help make your site responsive and mobile-friendly.
Looking good on a mobile device isn't just an option anymore- it's a requirement. In 2018, 58% of web traffic came from mobile devices, while the average mobile bounce rate was 50%. More people are visiting websites on their mobile devices than ever before, but the user experience they receive remains problematic. 
The importance of mobile-friendly design and responsiveness to deliver the best online experience possible will only become more critical for site owners. To be mobile-friendly and responsive means you want your site to not only load fast, but also be easy to navigate, text must be easy to read, pictures must load correctly, and forms should submit properly. Although it can be tricky to make your website aesthetically pleasing and easy-to-use on mobile, these plugins can help your site become more responsive and mobile-friendly.
AMP

The AMP project is a publishing format created by Google to tackle the challenge of mobile responsiveness head-on and enhance site performance for mobile website users. AMP pages are specially designed for search users to quickly load website pages without using any extraneous or unnecessary data. With the AMP Plugin for WordPress, you can enable your web experiences to be consistently fast, beautiful, and highperforming across different platforms. This plugin is a great option for sites with a ton of content (like news sites) and can also help your content rank better on search engines.
Touchy - WordPress Mobile Menu Plugin

As alluded to above, a mobile screen's smaller size means its navigation simply can't be as complex as a larger screen. With paid plugin Touchy,  you can easily translate your desktop site to be tailored to a smaller screen, offering a flawless browsing experience. Through its mobile-focused usability features, users are given complete control over how they want their mobile site to look while still keeping parts of their desktop site(s) intact.
WordPress Menu Plugin - Superfly Responsive Menu

Let's face it, aside from beautiful aesthetic, easy navigation is one of the most crucial components of a great user experience. Superfly is a top choice for many WordPress users when it comes to building a 100 percent responsive WordPress menu that's user-friendly on both desktop and mobile. The plugin promises to make website navigation easier by removing extra clicks while also providing a ton of customization options, like enhanced mobile support, a styling menu, and displaying control for different pages.



Map plugins.
Any business owner knows that making your physical storefront (if you have one) easy to find is an incredibly important part of being successful. Just like everything else, WordPress plugins have a solution-maps. Implement a map widget and you will no longer have to field phone calls telling people to turn left at the big tree.
Google Maps Widget

If you like a little more control and customization for your Google Maps, then installing the Google Maps Widget is a great way to go. With Google Maps Widget you can easily set up a thumbnail with a lightbox. After it's installed, you can adjust how the thumbnail looks and decide whether or not you want street or satellite view. Once users click on the thumbnail, the map will expand for a clearer view.
WP Google Map Plugin

Much like the plugin above, if you like to use Google Maps, the WP Google Map Plugin might be right for you. With this plugin installed, you can add an unlimited number of responsive maps directly to your site using shortcodes. Add multiple points to one map or just show one location. All maps are responsive, can be used with WordPress Multisite, and allow for easy access to Google Earth view. You can even show realtime traffic conditions on your map if you choose. 
All of the above is included in the free version, but if you want to go pro, you can display maps based on a user's current location, use custom post types, and more. The free version is full-featured and will display maps in minutes. 
Leaflet Maps Marker

If you abide by strict security standards, then Leaflet Maps Marker might be for you. The plugin gives you the ability to display locations and directions on your WordPress site and is up to par on its security standards. With Leaflet Maps Marker, you can search for locations by using keyless geocoding providers (like Google Places) that use a mandatory API key registration. 
The plugin also offers a great deal of customization items, such as matching your map to the basemap of choice (e.g. Open Street Map, Google Maps, Bing, Mapbox, and any custom WMTS-map). The backend also contains an array of options, like enabling a TinyMCE button for easily searching and adding maps on post/pages edit screen.
Real estate plugins.
When it comes to building a real estate site, you'll likely want to take advantage of some plugins that attract and inform real estate customers. The following plugins are some of the best real estate plugins available, and are packed with features like lead generation tools, stunning picture galleries, advanced search options, and more.
Optima Express + MarketBoost IDX

The Optima Express + MarketBoost IDX plugin from iHomefinder adds responsive IDX real estate search and MLS property listings to your WordPress site, with branded drip emails including sold, open, and active listings. Optima Express magnetizes customers to your site with high quality photos, galleries, reports, and lead generation tools.
Easy Property Listing

Easy Property Listings might be the most feature-rich real estate plugin on the market. This plugin will work with any theme and its more notable features include multiple listing types, integration with Google Maps, and support for different currencies.
Comment plugins.
Adding a comment section to your site is a great way to interact with your audience. Equipping your site with the right comment plugin can tremendously improve the user experience and make people more inclined to interact with your website. Here are a couple of recommended comment plugins that can help you add this functionality to your site.
Comments - wpDiscuz

Extending WordPress' comment system is super easy with Comments - wpDiscuz. Using an AJAX real-time comment system, this plugin gives you the ability to add interactive comment boxes to your posts and pages. Providing a clean interface with responsive comments, wpDiscuz can also be integrated with user profile plugins including BuddyPress, and anti-spam plugins like Akismet. You can even integrate social network login plugins with this comment plugin. 
Comments - wpDiscuz also offers many additional features, including comment author notification options, a "Read More" option for super long comments, an email subscription option, ability for users to edit their comments, and more.
Disable Comments

While comments can be great, sometimes people don't always have the nicest things to say. Or, perhaps specific posts have been bombarded with unwanted/spam comments and you just don't want people to be able to comment there at all. Disable Comments is a handy plugin for restricting comments for certain pages on your site. Putting this plugin to use means you don't have to regulate unwanted comments day-to-day-in fact, you won't have to worry about it at all!










1

1



1

The ultimate guide to plugins.	MARKETING PLUGINS

The ultimate guide to plugins.	MARKETING PLUGINS

	6

	6





The ultimate guide to plugins.	MARKETING PLUGINS

The ultimate guide to plugins.	MARKETING PLUGINS

	6

	6





The ultimate guide to plugins.	MONETIZING PLUGINS

The ultimate guide to plugins.	MONETIZING PLUGINS

	6

	6





The ultimate guide to plugins.	MONETIZING PLUGINS

The ultimate guide to plugins.	MONETIZING PLUGINS

	6

	6





The ultimate guide to plugins.	DEVELOPMENT + DESIGN PLUGINS

The ultimate guide to plugins.	DEVELOPMENT + DESIGN PLUGINS

	6

	6





The ultimate guide to plugins.	DEVELOPMENT + DESIGN PLUGINS

The ultimate guide to plugins.	DEVELOPMENT + DESIGN PLUGINS

	6

	6





The ultimate guide to plugins.	MEDIA PLUGINS

MEDIA PLUGINS

	6







The ultimate guide to plugins.	MEDIA PLUGINS

MEDIA PLUGINS

	6







The ultimate guide to plugins.	CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE PLUGINS

The ultimate guide to plugins.	CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE PLUGINS

	6

	6





The ultimate guide to plugins.	CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE PLUGINS

The ultimate guide to plugins.	CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE PLUGINS

	6

	6





DEFENSIVE PLUGINS

The ultimate guide to plugins.	DEFENSIVE PLUGINS



	6





DEFENSIVE PLUGINS

The ultimate guide to plugins.	DEFENSIVE PLUGINS



	6





The ultimate guide to plugins.	SITE OPTIMIZATION PLUGINS

The ultimate guide to plugins.	SITE OPTIMIZATION PLUGINS

	6

	6





The ultimate guide to plugins.	SITE OPTIMIZATION PLUGINS

The ultimate guide to plugins.	SITE OPTIMIZATION PLUGINS

	6

	6





The ultimate guide to plugins.	SITE OPTIMIZATION PLUGINS

The ultimate guide to plugins.	SITE OPTIMIZATION PLUGINS

	6

	6





The ultimate guide to plugins.	SITE OPTIMIZATION PLUGINS

The ultimate guide to plugins.	SITE OPTIMIZATION PLUGINS

	6

	6





The ultimate guide to plugins.	MICELLANEOUS PLUGINS

The ultimate guide to plugins.	MICELLANEOUS PLUGINS

	6

	6





The ultimate guide to plugins.	MICELLANEOUS PLUGINS

The ultimate guide to plugins.	MICELLANEOUS PLUGINS

	6

	6

















